## Gnu Graphics

GNU Graphics are command line utilities that produces graphs of
1 or 2 dimensional data.

    cat data | statistics | graph | plot | printer

Graph and plot are a work-alike open-source replacement for those
in [Bell Labs V7 Unix](https://www.unix.com/man-page/v7/1G/graph/).  

They conform to the [Unix philosophy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_philosophy)
of modular individual commands that do one thing well, and are
composable to accomplish more complex tasks.  V7 Unix defines a
plot file format that is the interface between 'graph' and
'plot', the [device independent plot file
format](https://www.unix.com/man-page/v7/5/plot/).  This approach
simplifies developing support for new output devices and
integration with desktop publishing software.

The program `graph` reads ASCII or binary numeric data and writes
a stream of device independent plotting commands.  The various
`plot` programs read plotting commands and display plot files on
X windows, postscript printers, desktop publishing systems such
as LaTeX or ivtools, and other compatible output devices.

`graph` reads both ASCII and binary data files and writes a plot
file with or without axes and labels.  You can specify labels and ranges
for the axes, and you can set the sizes and position of the plot on the
page.  Each invocation of graph produces a plot with single set of axes
and data.  You can place an arbitrary number of plots on the page by
concatenating the plot output of several invocations.

`plot2ps` is a utility for converting plot files into Postscript.
The `plot2ps` utility reads plotting commands from named files or
the standard input and writes Postscript to the standard output.
You can then print the Postscript output on a printer, or edit it
using the
[idraw](http://ivtools.sourceforge.net/ivtools/idraw.html)
graphics editor.  You can also easily include the output in LaTeX
documents using `dvips` and the LaTeX command `psfig`.

## Software that works with GNU Graphics

GNU Graphics can be used for Desktop publishing, together with
idraw, ivtools, LaTex and Ghostscript. For example, one may
generate figures using plot2ps, edit them using idraw, include
the figures in LaTeX documents, generate printer-ready final
postscript using LaTeX, and preview the final output using
GhostScript.  This is what Rich Murphey used to write his PhD
thesis, and was the motivation for GNU Graphics.

[idraw](http://ivtools.sourceforge.net/ivtools/idraw.html) is a
vector graphics editor for X windows that can edit the output of
`plot2ps`. It is part of
[ivtools](https://github.com/vectaport/ivtools-1.2).

[Ghostscript](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ghostscript) is a
PostScript previewer.  It is available via 'apt install
ghostscript'.

The `dvips` utility converts dvi files generated by LaTeX into
post-script.  It also has support for inclusion of PostScript
figures into LaTeX documents. It is available via `apt get
texlive-latex-recommended`.

## Install

This will download, build, regression test, and install Gnu Graphics.

``` shell
git clone https://github.com/rich-murphey/gnu-graphics.git
cd gnu-graphics
./configure
make all
make install
```

## Acknowledgements

Rich Murphey wrote graph, plot2ps, plot2fig, plot2tek, tek2plot,
spline, double, the C language API, this documentation, the build
and packaging methods and regression tests. He wrote them in 1990
to produce graphics for for his doctoral dissertation. Murphey
assigned the copyright to the [Free Software
Foundation](http://www.fsf.org/).

Richard Stallman <Rms@ai.mit.edu> provided valuable feedback such
as avoiding static limits on file size or dimensional
attributes, and editorial support for the documentation.  

John Interrante provided the Postscript prologue from
[ivtools](https://github.com/vectaport/ivtools-1.2). 

Arthur Smith (Lassp, Cornell University)
<arthur@helios.tn.cornell.edu> wrote xplot.

David B. Rosen <rosen@bu.edu> wrote the Tek 4014 emulator,
tek2plot, used to convert Tek 4014 plot files to device
independent plot files.

Ray Toy <toy@dino.ecse.rpi.edu> wrote the the statistics
utilities, including: cor, cusum, gas, hilo, log, lreg, mean, mod,
pair, power, prod, qsort, rand, rank, root, round, siline, total,
var, atob, btoa and abs. Ray also rewrote the tick mark spacing
code in graph and incorporated gnu getopt.

David B. Rosen <rosen@bu.edu>, Jeffrey Templon
<templon@copper.ucs.indiana.edu> and David W. Forslund
<dwf%hope.ACL@lanl.gov> tested alpha versions.

## Bug Reports

Issues may be reported on GitHub at:

https://github.com/rich-murphey/gnu-graphics/issues

To expedite your bug report, please specify your machine's OS
version and compiler version.

## graph Examples

Each invocation of `graph` plots data read from stdin or named
files together in a single plot with or without axes and labels.  The
following sections show common usage of `graph`.

## Simple examples using graph

By default, `graph` reads ASCII data from the standard input or
files specified on the command line.  `graph` reads pairs of
values, x and y coordinates:

```text
0.0  0.0
1.0  0.2
2.0  0.0
3.0  0.4
4.0  0.2
5.0  0.6
```

To plot this data, you might use

```text
graph < ASCII_data_file |plot
```

where ASCII_data_file could contain data similar to the above example.
You can replace the command `plot` with `plot2tek` if you have
a Tektronix 4010 compatible graphics terminal, `plot2ps` if you
have a postscript compatible printer or previewer, or `xplot` if
you have an X window system display.

Note that `graph` is commonly supplied with some operating systems.
If so, some confusion may arise if the system supplied version is
executed mistakenly.  On unix systems, you can determine which version
you invoke by typing the command `which graph`, which prints the
file name of the version you invoke by default.

To reduce the change the size of the plot and position it in the middle
of the display, you could use

```text
graph -h .4 -w .4 -r .2 -u .2 < ASCII_data_file |plot
```

where `h` and `w` are the height and width of the plot and
`r` and `u` indicate how far up and to the right the plot is
positioned.

You can put symbols at each data point using

```text
graph -S 2 .01 < ASCII_data_file |plot
```

where 2 indicates which symbol to plot, and .01 indicates it's size.

You can choose the type of line draw on each curve:

```text
graph -m 2 < ASCII_data_file |plot
```

where 2 indicates a dotted line that connects the data points.

## The format of input to graph

As mentioned above, by default `graph` reads ASCII pairs of values,
x and y coordinates, from the standard input or files specified on the
command line.  Optional labels may be placed after each coordinate in
the data file.  The label ends at the end of the line:

```text
3.0  0.4 this is a label for point (3.0, 0.4).
```

The label must be enclosed in double quotes if it would otherwise be
appear to be a coordinate:

```text
3.0  0.4 "5.0 looks like a value."
```

You can use the `-b` to break lines after each label in the input.
Use a pair of empty double quotes if you need to break a line, but do
not need a label.

```text
0.0  0.0
2.0  0.0
1.0  0.2
""
0.0  0.1
2.0  0.2
4.0  0.3
```

You can also break curves using `-M` option to break lines whenever
the abscissal values between successive pairs of points decrease.  When
using `-M`, each continuous curve has monotonicly increasing
abscissal values.

```text
0.0  0.0 first data set
2.0  0.0
4.0  0.2
0.0  0.1 second data set
2.0  0.2
4.0  0.3
```

`graph` will automaticly generate abscissal values for you if you
specify the `-a` option.  Only ordinate values are given in the
data, and the data is then assumed to be equally sampled along the
abscissa.  The values following `-a` on the command line specify
the sampling interval and the abscissal value of the first data
point.

```text
0.0
0.1
0.2 label for point (2.0, 0.2)
0.3
0.2
0.3
```

## Combining several data sets in one plot

There are cases where you will want to superimpose several data sets or
several plots on top of each other.  If for example, the data sets are
in separate files, you can specify each by it's name on the command
line.  Since `graph` reads the standard input only if no files are
named on the command line, you must add the name `--` if you want
`graph` to read the standard input as well.

```text
graph data-file-one data-file-two data-file-three |plot
```

For comparison sake, you might wish to distinguish the data in one set
from another either by using different symbols at each point or by
distinguishing the type of line draw.  You can do this by preceding
each file name with options affecting the symbol or line style used to
plot that data.

```text
graph -S 1 data-file-one -S 3 data-file-two -S 4 data-file-three |plot
```
or
```text
graph -m 1 data-file-one -m 3 data-file-two -S 4 data-file-three |plot
```

If you need to superimpose several data sets, but must invoke graph
separately for each, you will have to specify the limits of the
axes.

```text
graph -x 0 100 -y -3 3 -S 3 -m -1 < ASCII_data_file_1 >> plot_file
```

where `-x 0 100` specifies the limits on the x axis, `-y -3 3`
specifies the limits on the y axis, `-S 2` specifies a box to be
drawn at each point, and `-m -1` specifies that no line is to be
draw connecting the points.  You can overlay a second data set on the first
by using:

```text
graph -s -g 0 -x 0 100 -y -3 3 -m 0 < ASCII_data_file_1 >> plot_file
```

where `-s` avoids erasing the page, `-g 0` avoids drawing the
axis, tick marks and labels which were drawn previously, and `-m 0`
specifies that solid lines are draw connecting the points.

## How to put multiple plots on one page

The command
```text
graph -h .4 -w .4 -r .1 -u .1 < ASCII_data_file_1 >  plot_file
```

will put a single box containing the plot in the lower left hand
quarter of the page.  You can add another plot to the upper left hand
corner of the page using the command

```text
graph -s -h .4 -w .4 -r .1 -u .6 < ASCII_data_file_2 >> plot_file
```

Be sure you use the `-s` option so the the first plot isn't
erased.

Likewise you can add plots to the right hand side of the page using

```text
graph -s -h .4 -w .4 -r .6 -u .1 < ASCII_data_file_3 >> plot_file
graph -s -h .4 -w .4 -r .6 -u .6 < ASCII_data_file_4 >> plot_file
```

The tick marks can be moved inside the box and labels moved to the
opposite sides using

```text
graph -T -.005 < ASCII_data_file >> plot_file
```

## Reading other data formats

`graph` will read binary data in integer, short integer, float, and
double float format when you use the `-d` option followed by
`f`, or `d`, respectively.  There are two advantage to using
binary data: 1) `graph` runs significantly faster because the
computational overhead for converting data from ASCII to binary is
eliminated, and 2) the input files can be significantly smaller than the
ASCII format would be.  Double float is the fastest format to read,
while short integer is the most space conservative.  If you have very
large data sets, using a binary format can reduce storage and runtime
costs.

For example, you can create double float data as output from C language
programs:

```text
#include <stdio.h>
void write_point (x, y)
  double x, y;
{
  fwrite(&x, sizeof (double), 1, stdout);
  fwrite(&y, sizeof (double), 1, stdout);
}
```

You can then plot data written this way using:

```text
graph -d d <datafile >plotfile
```

## Graph Command Line Options

The following table describes each of the command line arguments to graph.
Each option which takes an argument is followed by the type and default
values of the argument in parentheses.

##### -a [`step_size` [`lower_limit`]] | +auto-abscissa [`step_size` [`lower_limit`]]
(floats, defaults 1 and 0) Automaticly generate abscissa (x) values.
This option specifies that the data contains only ordinate (y) values.
The difference between successive x values will be `step_size`, and
the first x value will be `lower_limit`.  To return to reading
abscissal values from the input you can specify `-a 0`, which
disables automatic generation of the abscissa and returns
`step_size` and `lower_limit` to their default values.
###### -b  | +break-on-labels
Assumes multiple data sets are in the data file, and the data sets are
separated by a label.  The default is don't break on labels.
###### -M  | +break-non-monotone
When successive abscissa (x) values decrease, a separate data set
is assumed.  This allows multiple data sets in each file.  Similar to
`-b`.
###### -f `size`  | +fontsize `size`
Specify the size of the desired font as `size` points.  Not all display
devices will honor this command.
###### -N `x|y`  | +no-label `x|y`
By default, values at each tick mark are labeled beside the axis. This
option removes the labeling of the tick marks on the specified
axis.
###### -R  | +dont-round-to-next-tick
By default, the ends of the axes are extended to the next tick mark.
This option prohibits rounding the limits of the axes to the next tick
mark.
###### -c `string`  | +point-label `string`
This option defines `string` as the default label for each point.
Any label in the input will override this default.
###### -S `symbol_number` [`symbol_size`]  | +symbol `symbol_number` [`symbol_size`]
(integer and float, defaults -1 and 0.01) Draw a symbol at each point in
the data. `symbol_number` specifies the shape of the symbol
according to the following table and `symbol_size` specifies the
fractional size of the symbol with respect to the height and width of
the plot.  Note that you can specify symbols to be drawn without any line
connecting them by specifying the option `-m -1`.

| symbol_number | description      |
|--------------:|:-----------------|
|            -1 | no symbol at all |
|             0 | plus sign (+)    |
|             1 | cross (x)        |
|             2 | star (*)         |
|             3 | box              |
|             4 | diamond          |
|             5 | circle           |

###### -T `tick_size`  | +ticksize `tick_size`
(float, default .01) `tick_size` is the fractional size of the tick
marks on each axis.  A value of 1.0 produces tick marks on the x (y)
axis whose length is equal to the width (height) of the plot.
###### -X `x_label`  | +xtitle `x_label`
(string, default blank) `x_label` is a label printed below the x
axis.
###### -Y `y_label`  | +ytitle `y_label`
(string, default blank) `y_label` is a label printed to the right of
the y axis.
###### -d `data-format`  | +data-format `data-format`
This specifies what format the input data is in.  Note labels can be
used only in ASCII format input files.

| data-format | description               |
|------------:|:--------------------------|
|      a or A | ASCII data                |
|      i or I | binary integer data       |
|      s or S | binary short integer data |
|      f or F | binary float data         |
|      d or D | binary double data        |

Debugging information, including the data read in, is sent to the
standard error output.
###### -g `grid_style`  | +grid `grid_style`
(integer, default 1) `grid_style` specifies the type of box framing
the plot and whether grid lines are drawn inside the box.

| grid_style | description                                                     |
|-----------:|:----------------------------------------------------------------|
|          0 | no box around plot, no axes, no labels.                         |
|          1 | box containing a grid and axes with tick marks and labels.      |
|          2 | box around plot, tick marks around the box and labels.          |
|          3 | box around plot, ticks on left and lower sides only and labels. |
|          4 | axes intersect at the origin without a box or grid.             |

###### -h `height`  | +height-plot `height`
(float, default 0.8) `height` specifies the fractional height of the
plot with respect to the height of the plotting area.  A value of 1.0
will produce a box which fills the available area.  Note that the tick
marks and labels are outside this area so that values less than 1.0 are
generally used.
###### -L `top_label`  | +toptitle `top_label`
(string, default blank) `top_label` is a label placed above the
plot.
###### -m `line_mode`  | +linestyle `line_mode`
(integer, default 0) `line_mode` specifies the mode (or style) of
lines drawn between data points.

| line_mode | description    |
|----------:|:---------------|
|         0 | no line at all |
|         1 | solid          |
|         2 | dotted         |
|         3 | shortdashed    |
|         4 | dotdashed      |
|         5 | longdashed     |
|         6 | disconnected   |

###### -r `right`  | +right-margin-posn `right`
(float, default 0.1) Move the plot to the right by a fractional amount
`right` with respect to the width of the plotting area.  This
produces a margin on the left hand side of the plot.  A value of 0.5
will produce a margin half the width of the available area.  Note that
the tick marks and labels are drawn in the margin.
###### -u `up`  | +bottom-margin-posn `up`
(float, default 0.1) Move the plot up by a fractional amount `up`
with respect to the height of the plotting area.  This produces a margin
below the plot.  A value of 0.5 will produce a margin half the height of
the available area.  Note that the tick marks and labels are drawn in
the margin.
###### -s  | +save-screen
Save the screen. This option prevent graph from erasing the previous
contents of the graphics window or device.
###### -t  | +transpose
Transpose the abscissa and ordinate.  This option causes the axes to be
interchanged, and the options which apply to each axis to be applied to
the opposite axis.  That is, data is read in as (y, x) pairs and
`-x`, `-X` and `-lx` apply to the y axis.
###### -w `width`  | +width-plot `width`
(float, default 0.8) `width` specifies the fractional width of the
plot with respect to the width of the plotting area.  A value of 1.0
will produce a box which fills the available area.  Note that the tick
marks and labels are outside this area, so values less than 1.0 are
generally used.
###### -x `lower_limit` `upper_limit`  | +xlimits `lower_limit` `upper_limit`
(floats) The arguments `lower_limit` and `upper_limit` specify
the limits of the x axis. By default the upper and lower limits are
taken from the data.  If unspecified the limits of the data are
used.
###### -y `lower_limit` `upper_limit`  | +ylimits `lower_limit` `upper_limit`
These arguments specify the scale and limits of the y axis as for the x
axis above.
###### -l `x|y`  | +log-axis `x|y`
The argument indicates which axis should be a log axis.  Either one or
both x- and y-axes can be specified by using the appropriate letter.  Use
`xy` or `yx` to specify both.  | +high-byte-first  | +low-byte-first
These options force graph to use the specified byte order when writing
out the plot file.  By default the byte order is host dependent.


## Examples Using plot2ps

To produce a plot of data arranged in ordered pairs of x and y
coordinates in an ASCII file, you can use:

```text
graph <asciiDataFile | plot2ps | lpr -Plw
```

To create a simple Postscript figure you can use:

```text
echo 0 0 1 1 2 0 | spline | graph | plot2ps > test.ps
```

To edit the plot:

```text
idraw test.ps
```

To use the previewer to look at the plot:

```text
gs test.ps
```

## Plot2ps Command Line Options

`plot2ps` is a relatively simple utility in that there are few
command line options to choose from.  The plot file format does
not contain methods for specifying font or font size, so you must
specify these things with options.  There are no other options for
controlling the picture.

The plot file format is machine dependent on the byte order of
unformatted, signed, two byte integer coordinates contained in plot
commands.  The `-high-byte-first` or `-low-byte-first`
option specifies this order explicitly.  `plot2ps` attempts to
determine the byte order from commands early in the plot file, but the
method is heuristic and is not foolproof.  Several standard plot sizes
specified by the `open` command are used to recognize byte order
by `plot2ps`.  If these sizes are recognized in byte reversed
order, `plot2ps` adjusts accordingly.  These sizes include
504x504, 2048x2048 (versatek plotters), 2100x2100,
3120x3120(Tektronix 4010 terminals) and 4096x4096 (gsi 300
terminals).

The remaining command line options may be used specify an alternate
Postscript prologue and to print the licensing information.

Input plot files names may be specified anywhere on the command line.
If no file names are specified, or the name `-` is specified, the
standard input is read for plotting instructions.  Only the font or
font size options which precede a file name will affect the text for
that file.

###### -H  | +help
The help option prints a summary of command line syntax for
`plot2ps`, a list of the font names (the standard builtin
Postscript fonts), and version, copyright and warranty information.
Specifying this options causes plot2ps to ignore files on the standard
input.  You can specify a file on the standard input explicitly with
the option `-` if you want it to read the standard input as
well.
###### -v | -V  | +version
This option prints version, copyright and warranty information.
###### -fontsize `size` | -f `size`
The fontsize options specifies the default size in printer's points
(1/72 inch) of all text appearing in the plot.  If unspecified, the
size defaults to 14 points.

Some sizes are supported better than others under X windows.  The
standard sizes distributed with X windows are 8, 10, 12, 14, 18, and
24 points.  Text at these point sizes will display correctly in the
`idraw` editor.  Other font sizes will print correctly on a
Postscript device such as the laser writer, but may not appear at the
correct size in the `idraw` editor.
###### -font `name` | -fo `name`
The font name option specifies the name of the default font for all
text appearing in the plot.  `plot2ps -help` prints a listing of
the font names on the standard output.  These names include the
available builtin fonts on standard Postscript printers.
###### -high-byte-first | -h
The high-byte-first option specifies explicitly that the higher order
byte of each signed, two byte integer occurs first in the file.  It
disables determination of byte order from the file itself.
###### -line-width `width`
`width` is the width of lines drawn in the plot, and defaults to a
value of 0.  A value of 0 will produce the thinest line possible in a
device dependent fashion, however this is known to cause problems for
older versions of idraw.  The line width is device independent for a
positive values of `width`.
###### -low-byte-first | -l
The low-byte-first option specifies explicitly that the lower order
byte of each signed, two byte integer occurs first in the file.  It
disables determination of byte order from the file itself.
###### -prologue `filename` | -p `filename`
The prologue option specifies the name of an alternate Postscript prologue `filename` to
be used in place of the default `idraw` prologue.  The prologue declares procedures used
to draw each graphic object.  The default prologue was generously provided by John
Interrante from [ivtools](https://github.com/vectaport/ivtools-1.2).
###### -copying | -warranty
The copying and warranty options print a copy of the GNU General
Public License on the standard error output.  Included is conditions
for copying `plot2ps` and information on the lack of any
warranty.

These conditions do not cover the output of `plot2ps`.  The only
conditions imposed on the output are those which come from the
prologue that you are using.
###### -signed | -unsigned
The signed and unsigned options specify whether coordinates in the
plot file are signed.  By convention, coordinates are always signed.
Some plot files do not follow this convention, and you can use the
unsigned option to convert those files.

###### -bbox
The bbox option specifies that a bounding box comment will be written at
the end of the output file.  This information is useful for document
preparation systems which determine how to size and place the figure
using the bounding box.  See also the atend script.


## A plot file previewer for X11

`xplot` is a plot file previewer for the X window system.  It reads
GNU plot commands from its standard input and draws the resulting
graphics in an X window.

After xplot reaches the end-of-file on the input, it puts itself in
the background (forks).  Control returns to the calling program, while
xplot continues, remaining on screen.

To exit, click the left mouse button in the xplot window.  Note that
xplot ignores SIGHUP signals, so you must use another signal to kill
xplot if necessary.

## Xplot Options

`xplot` accepts all of the standard X toolkit command line options,
and the initial geometry specification determines the resolution, with a
default geometry of 500x500 pixels.

The following standard X Toolkit command line arguments may be used with
`xplot`:

###### -bg `color`
This specifies the color to use for the background of the window.  
The default is `white`.
###### -bd `color`
This specifies the color to use for the border of the window.
The default is `black`.
###### -bw `number`
This specifies the width in pixels of the border surrounding the window.
###### -fg `color`
This specifies the color to use for displaying text.  The default is 
`black`.
###### -fn `font`
This specifies the font to be used for displaying normal text.  The
default is `6x10`.
###### -rv
This indicates that reverse video should be simulated by swapping
the foreground and background colors.
###### -geometry `geometry`
This specifies the preferred size and position of the plot window.
###### -display `host`:`display`
This specifies the X server to contact.
###### -xrm `resourcestring`
This specifies a toolkit resource property.  See the manual page for xrdb.

`xplot` uses the athena Command widget in the X Toolkit.  So, it
understands all of the core resource names and classes as well
as:

###### reverseVideo
(class ReverseVideo)
Specifies that the foreground and background colors should be reversed.


### Example
The resources:

```text
Xplot.font: 6x9
Xplot.geometry: 300x300
```

will set the font used in the plot window to `6x9' and the size of the
window to 300 by 300 pixels.

## Using Plot2fig

To create a simple plot file one can use:

```text
echo 0 0 1 1 2 0 | spline | graph | plot2fig > test.fig
```

To edit the plot:

```text
fig test.fig
```

To convert the fig file into dvi code, create a latex file containing 
a document which includes the figure:

```text
\\documentstyle\[\]{article}
\\begin{document}
\\input{test}
\\end{document}
```

Then, run transfig on the figure and latex on the document:

```text
% transfig -L latex test.fig
% make test.tex
% latex t.tex
```

To edit a plot of data arranged in ordered pairs of x and y coordinates in
an ASCII file, one can use:

```text
% graph <asciiDataFile | plot2fig >file.fig
% fig file.fig
```


## A plot file to fig file translator

`plot2fig` reads plotting instructions from the specified input
files and/or the standard input and produces `Fig` compatible code
on it's standard output.  This output file can be edited with the fig
(Facility for Interactive Generation of figures) graphics editor.  The
output can subsequently be converted to pictex, Postscript, latex, epic,
eepic, and tpic languages using the `transfig` translator.

Any unrecognized options on the command line are assumed to be input
files.  The standard input is read by default only if no other files
specified on the command line are successfully opened.  A single dash
(-) on the command line indicates the standard input is to be read.
Each option is set and each file read in the order they are specified on
the command line.

For compatibility with pic2fig, plot2fig ignores leading white space in
labels.  Labels containing all white space are ignored.

###### -fn `name` | -fontname `name`
Default: the default font of the transfig output device.  This option
sets the font for all subsequent text to `name`.  Recognized font
names are typewriter, modern, italic, bold, and times.  In addition,
courier is an alias for typewriter and roman is an alias for times.
Note that the fonts are device dependent.
###### -fs `size` | -fontsize `size`
Default: 12. This option sets the size of subsequent text to `size`
(in printer's points).
###### -h | -high-byte-first
This option specifies that the byte ordering of two byte integers in the
input plot file is high byte first.
###### -l | -low-byte-first
This option specifies that the byte ordering of two byte integers in the
input plot file is low byte first.
###### -warranty | -copying
This option prints out the copying conditions and warranty information.
###### -signed | -unsigned
Default: signed.  This option specifies whether two byte integers in the
input plot file are unsigned or signed.
###### -
This option specifies explicitly that the standard input should be read for
plotting instructions.


## Tektronix 4010 output


###### -H  | +help
The help option prints a summary of command line syntax, a list of the
known font names, and version, copyright and warranty information.
Specifying this options causes plot to ignore the standard input, so you
must specify the option `-` if you want it to read the standard
input as well.
###### -v | -V  | +version
This option prints version, copyright and warranty information.
###### -f `size`  | +fontsize `size`
The fontsize options specifies the default size in printer's points
(1/72 inch) of all text appearing in the plot.  If unspecified, the
size defaults to 14 points.
###### +high-byte-first  | +low-byte-first
These options force graph to use the specified byte order when writing
out the plot file.  By default the byte order is host dependent.
###### -F `name`  | +fontname `name`
The font name option specifies the name of the default font for all
text appearing in the plot.  `plot -help` prints a listing of
the font names on the standard output.  These names include the
available builtin fonts on standard Postscript printers.
###### -h  | +high-byte-first
The high-byte-first option specifies explicitly that the higher order
byte of each signed, two byte integer occurs first in the file.  It
disables determination of byte order from the file itself.
###### -l  | +low-byte-first
The low-byte-first option specifies explicitly that the lower order
byte of each signed, two byte integer occurs first in the file.  It
disables determination of byte order from the file itself.
###### -p `filename`  | +prologue `filename`
The prologue option specifies the name of an alternate Postscript
prologue `filename` to be used in place of the default
`idraw` prologue.  The prologue declares procedures used to draw
each graphic object.  The default prologue was provided by
John Interrante from [ivtools](https://github.com/vectaport/ivtools-1.2).
###### +copying  | +C  | +warranty  | +W
The copying and warranty options print a copy of the GNU General
Public License on the standard error output.  Included is conditions
for copying `plot` and information on the lack of any
warranty.
###### -s  | +signed-input
###### -u  | +unsigned-input
The signed and unsigned options specify whether coordinates in the
plot file are signed.  By convention, coordinates are always signed.
Some plot files do not follow this convention, and you can use the
unsigned option to convert those files.


## Including a Figure in an Article

This is an example of LaTeX code which places the figure generated in
the previous example in a page of text.

```text
\documentstyle[]{article}
\input{psfig}
\begin{document}
\title{Title of the article.}
\author{The Author's name}
\maketitle
This is an example of how to include Postscript figures in LaTeX documents.
\begin{figure}[h]
\centerline{\psfig{figure=test.ps,height=3in}}
\caption{Here is a description of the figure which will appear below it.}
\end{figure}
Note that the above figure was included using dvips.
\end{document}
```

If the above LaTeX code is contained in a file called "mytext.tex"
you can use the commands

```text
latex mytext
dvips mytext.dvi >mytext.ps
lpr -Plw mytext.ps
```

to format and print the example text.

## Options to psfig for Including Figures

`psfig` is a LaTeX command used to insert a Postscript figure
into a document.

`psfig` can be used to insert `plot2ps` generated PostScript
into a LaTeX document.  The placement of the `psfig` command
tells LaTeX where in the document to place the PostScript, and
arguments to the command give the name of the file containing the
PostScript, and the desired size of the figure.  Arguments are
separated by commas or blanks, and are of the form
`keyword=value`.  The following is a list of valid
arguments for the `psfig` command:

* `file=name` The file name of the PostScript figure.
* `height=size` The height of the figure (eg. 3in).  If you specify only a height or only a width, the width and height are scaled equally.  If you specify both a width and a height the aspect ratio will be affected.
* `width=size` The width of the figure (eg. 3in).
* `bbllx=coordinate` The bounding box lower left-hand x coordinate.  Any PostScript file which conforms to the PostScript Document Structuring Conventions version 2.0 should contain a bounding box information at the head of the file.  `plot2ps` output conforms to the version 2.0 conventions so that you should not need to use any of the bounding box options.
* `bblly=coordinate` The bounding box lower left-hand y coordinate.
* `bburx=coordinate` The bounding box upper right-hand x coordinate.
* `bbury=coordinate` The bounding box upper right-hand y coordinate.
* `rheight=size` Horizontal space to reserve for the figure.
* `rwidth=size` Vertical space to reserve for the figure.
* `clip=` Clip the figure.  `clip=` is a switch and takes no value, but the
* `=` must be present.  This option is useful for including PostScript figures which use the size of the clipping path to size themselves.


## A Perl script for use with psfig

`atend.pl` is a Perl script which moves the bounding box comment
from the trailer to the header.  Although either is legal, most document
preparation software, such as `psfig`, will only accept bounding
box comments in the header.  If you use `psfig` and the
`-bbox` option together, run `atend.pl` on the output of
`plot2ps` before importing the graphics using `psfig`.

`atend.pl` can be used as a filter:

```text
echo 0 0 1 1 2 0 | spline | graph >spline.pl
plot2ps -bbox |atend.pl - >spline.ps
```

Or, `atend.pl` can be used to fix the output file in place:

```text
echo 0 0 1 1 2 0 | spline | graph |plot2ps -bbox >spline.ps
atend.pl spline.ps
```

## libps, a Library of Plot Functions

Libps is a library of plot functions for drawing graphic object
using PostScript.  Before drawing any objects or using any of the
other functions, a program should call `openpl`.  Before exiting
and after all other libps calls a program should call
`closepl`.

The standard plot library includes:

* `arc` draw an arc
* `circle` draw a circle
* `closepl` close the device for output
* `cont` continue a line
* `erase` erase the page
* `label` print a label
* `line` draw a line
* `linemod` change the line mode (style)
* `move` move to a new coordinate
* `openpl` open the device for output
* `point` draw a point
* `space` define the user's plot space (size)


The extensions provided only in libps to take advantage of PostScript
features include:

* `alabel` print a vertically or horizontally justified label
* `color` change the color
* `fill` fill pattern for closed paths
* `fontname` set the font name
* `fontsize` set the font size
* `rotate` rotate subsequent text


##### int `alabel` (char `x_justify`, char `y_justify`, char `*label`);

`alabel` takes three arguments `x_justify`, `y_justify`,
and `label` and places the label according to the x and y axis
adjustments specified in `x_justify` and `y_justify`
respectively.  `x_justify` is a character containing either
`l`, `c`, or `r` for left, center or right justified
with respect to the current x coordinate.  `y_justify` is a
character containing either `b`, `c`, or `t` for
placing the bottom center or top of the label even with the current y
coordinate.  `*label` is a string containing the label.  The
current point is moved to follow the end of the text.

See 'fontname' on how to change the default font.
See 'fontsize' on how to change the font size.

##### int `arc` (int `x`, int `y`, int `x0`, int `y0`, int `x1`, int `y1`)

`arc` takes six integer arguments specifying the coordinates of
the center (`x`, `y`), beginning (`x0`, `y0`), and
ending (`x1`, `y1`) of a circular arc.  The current point
becomes (`x`, `y`).

##### int `circle` (int `x`, int `y`, int `r`)

`circle` takes three integer arguments specifying the center
(`x`, `y`) of the circle and its radius (`r`).  The
current point becomes (`x`, `y`).

##### int `closepl` ()

`closepl` takes no arguments.  It merely outputs the PostScript
trailer containing a `showpage` command.

##### int `color` (int `red`, int `green`, int `blue`);   

`color` sets the foreground color of all the following objects.
The arguments `red`, `green` and `blue` indicate the
intensity of red, green and blue components of the foreground color
respectively.  Each is a unsigned integer specifying an intensity in
the range from 0 to 0xFFFF.  A value of (0, 0, 0) represents black and
a value of (0xFFFF, 0xFFFF, 0xFFFF) indicates white.

##### int `cont` (int `x`, int `y`)

`cont` takes two integer arguments specifying the coordinate
(`x`, `y`) for the continuation of a line.  This draws a line
segment from the current point to the point (`x`, `y`).  The
current point then becomes (`x`, `y`).

##### int `erase` ()

`erase` normally erases all the graphics from the display before
a plot is viewed.  Since we start off with a blank page in PostScript
and `idraw` this function does nothing.

##### int `fill` (int `level`);   

`fill` sets the intensity of the filler for closed paths.  The
argument `level` indicates the grey level of the fill pattern.
It's value ranges from 1 to 0xFFFF.  A value of 1 represents black and
a value of 0xFFFF indicates white.  A value of 0 represents no fill,
or transparent.

##### int `fontname` (char `*font_name`);

`fontname` takes a single string argument, `font_name`,
specifying the name of the font to be used for following text.  The
laser writer builtin fonts are supported:

```text
        courier-bold
        courier-boldoblique
        courier-oblique
        courier
        helvetica-bold
        helvetica-boldoblique
        helvetica-oblique
        helvetica
        symbol
        times-bold
        times-bolditalic
        times-italic
        times-roman
```

##### int `fontsize` (int `size`);

`fontsize` takes a single integer argument `size` in
printer's points (1/72 inch) and sets the font size
accordingly.

##### int `label` (char `*s`)

`label` takes a single string argument `s` and draws the text
contained in `s` at the most recently used coordinate in the
current font.  By default the text is left justified and centered
vertically with respect to the current coordinate.

##### int `line` (int `x1`, int y`1`, int `x2`, int `y2`)

`line` takes four integer arguments specifying the beginning
(`x1`, `y1`) and ending (`x2`, `y2`) points of a line.
The current point becomes (`x2`, `y2`).

See 'linemod' for how to specify the style or pattern of line.

##### int `linemod` (char `*s`)

`linemod` takes a single string argument `s` containing the
name of the line style desired.  The names supported are longdashed,
disconnected, dotdashed, dotted, solid and shortdashed.  These
correspond to the following sixteen bit patterns:

```text
solid             --------------------------------
longdashed        -------         -------         
disconnected      -               -               
dotdashed         -----------  -  -----------  -  
dotted            - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
shortdashed       --              --              
```

##### int `move` (int `x`, int `y`)

`move` takes two integer arguments specifying the coordinate
(`x`, `y`) for the beginning of a new line.  This is
equivalent to lifting the pen on a plotter and moving it to a new
position without drawing any line.  The current point becomes
(`x`, `y`).

##### int `openpl` ()

`openpl` normally opens the device.  For PostScript we just print
out the PostScript prologue.  The following global variables defined
in `openpl` specify what prologue is written to the
output.

`user_has_prologue` is a flag.  If it is non-zero then the open
routine should output the user specified prologue contained in the
file specified in the string `users_prologue`.

`users_prologue` is a string containing the file name for any user
specified PostScript prologue.  This file is a substitute for the
default prologue.

##### int `point` (int `x`, int `y`)

`point` takes a pair of integer arguments specifying the
coordinate (`x`, `y`) for a single point.  The current point
then becomes (`x`, `y`).

##### int `rotate` (int `angle`);  

`rotate` takes three integer arguments.  The last argument,
`angle`, specifies the angle in degrees counter-clockwise from the
x (horizontal) axis following text.

##### int `space` (int `x0`, int `y0`, int `x1`, int `y1`)

`space` takes two pair of integers arguments specifying the
lower, left-hand and upper, right-hand limits of the range of plot
coordinates.  The scaling of input to output coordinate conversion is
adjusted to fit these ranges into the page.  Note however that if the
ranges of x and y coordinates are different the smallest scaling of
the two is used to avoid affecting the aspect ratio of the plot.  This
means that although the plot is scaled to fit on the page, the axes
are not stretched with respect to each other.

## The Plot File Format

The plot file is a set of plotting commands and data.  Each command is
a single ASCII character indicating which operation is to be
performed.  The data following a command is either a newline
terminated ASCII string or several signed, two byte integers in
binary format.  For example, the command to move the current point
to the coordinate (3,5) would be `m\000\003\000\005`.

Note that the byte order of the binary representation of the signed,
two byte integers is machine dependent, so on some machines, this
command might appear as `m\003\000\005\000`.  `plot2ps`
tries to guess the byte order from the arguments to the `openpl`
command and adjust the order accordingly.

The following table lists each single character commands followed by
the name of the corresponding libps function called to handle the data
and a description of the command and data.


* `a`: The arc command is followed by three pair of signed, two byte integers indicating the center, starting and ending points for a circular arc. The center becomes the the current point.  This is equivalent to the `arc` function.
* `c`: The circle command is followed by three signed, two byte integers.  The first two indicate the x and y coordinates of the center of the circle and the third indicates the radius of the circle.  The center becomes the the current point.  This is equivalent to the `circle` function.
* `C`: The color command is followed by three unsigned, two byte integer which indicate the intensity of `red`, `green` and `blue` components respectively of the background color.  For each component the range of intensity is from 0 to 65535.  A value of (`0`, `0`, `0`) represents black and (`65535`, `65535`, `65535`) represents white. This is equivalent to the `color` function.
* `e`: The erase command is followed by no data.  The erase command is not needed since in `idraw` and PostScript we start off with a blank page.  For this reason the erase command does not actually output any PostScript. This is equivalent to the `erase` function.
* `f`: The linemod command is followed by a newline terminated string containing the name of the line mode (or style) for all subsequent lines, circles and arcs. This is equivalent to the `linemod` function which describes the line styles and their names.
* `F`: The the fontname command is followed by a newline terminated string containing the name of the font to be used for all subsequent text. This is equivalent to the `fontname` function.
* `l`: The line command is followed by two pair of signed, two byte integers which indicate the starting and ending points of the line.  The second pair becomes the the current point. This is equivalent to the `line` function.
* `L`: The fill command is followed by an unsigned, two byte integer indicating the intensity of the fill for closed paths.  A value of 1 represents black and a value of 0xFFFF indicates white.  The value 0 is special in that is indicates that no solid fill should occur, and that the interior of the respective path is transparent. This is equivalent to the `fill` function.
* `m`: The move command is followed by a pair of signed, two byte integers containing the location of the new current point.  No line is drawn to this point as opposed to the continue command (`c`) which draws a line.  This is equivalent to the `move` function.
* `n`: The continue command is followed by pair of signed, two byte integers containing the coordinates of the endpoint of a line segment.  A line is drawn from the previous current point if it was set using a command such as move or continue.  This then becomes the the current point. This is equivalent to the `cont` function.
* `p`: The point command is followed by pair of signed, two byte integers containing the location of single point to be drawn.  This then becomes the the current point. This is equivalent to the `point` function.
* `r`: The rotate command is followed by one signed, two byte integer.  It indicates the rotation of all subsequent text.  The rotation is in degrees counter-clockwise from the x (horizontal) axis. This is equivalent to the `rotate` function.
* `s`: The space command is followed by two pair of signed, two byte integers which indicate the the lower right-hand and upper left-hand corners of the range of plot coordinate space.  `plot2ps` uses the third signed, two byte integer (the right-hand limit) to try to determine the byte order. This is equivalent to the `space` function which describes the recognized sizes.
* `S`: The fontsize command is followed by an signed, two byte integer containing the size in printers points of all subsequent text. This is equivalent to the `fontsize` function.
* `t`: The label command is followed by a newline terminated string contains a label which is printed at the current point.  It is left justified and centered vertically with respect to the current point.  The current point is then set at the end of the text. This is equivalent to the `label` function.
* `T`: The adjusted label command is followed by two characters which indicate the horizontal and vertical justification respectively and a newline terminated string containing the label.  The label is drawn with the specified justification and the current point is set at the end of the text.  This is equivalent to the `alabel` function which describes how to specify justification.


